Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about a church.
But this is no normal church.
Its name is the Westboro Baptist Church,
and the not-normally-sensational BBC
decided its members deserved the title
of “The Most Hated Family in America”.
So, in today’s episode, we’ll tell the
story about where it came from, why it is
so controversial and almost universally
reviled, and learn about how some, but
not all, of its members saw the light.
I should add, as a little disclaimer,
that the reason this church is so
controversial is because it holds
some deeply offensive beliefs,
about homosexuality in particular.
And while I hope it is obvious that these
are beliefs that I also find abhorrent and
in no way endorse, I wanted to give you
that little warning before we get into it.
OK then, let’s get started.
There is a brilliant British
journalist you might have heard
about called Louis Theroux.
He became something of a household
name in the late 1990s, after
making a documentary series called
“Louis Theroux's Weird Weekends”.
The premise was a simple one: he would
go and spend time with a group of people
with unusual beliefs or hobbies, people
who existed on the fringes of society.
The first episode was with TV evangelists,
born again, evangelical Christians,
and then he went on to visit people
who believed in UFOs, people working
in the porn industry, survivalists,
wrestlers, black nationalists, white
nationalists, body builders, and so on.
They were extremely popular from
the get-go, and Theroux became known
for his soft, non-judgmental style.
He was there as an observer, and
he had a particular knack for
making people feel comfortable.
He wasn’t there to judge, no matter
how odd or disagreeable someone’s
opinion was; he wasn’t there to tell
someone that they were wrong or that
they shouldn’t do something; he had a
particular empathy that was rare with
interviewers, and is still rare today.
He would spend time with drug
addicts who were clearly on a road to
self-destruction; he spent time with Jimmy
Saville, a man who would later be outed as
one of the UK’s most vicious paedophiles.
He spent time with neo-Nazis, fraudsters,
Westerners getting married to very young
Thai girls, and through all of this
he attempted to shine a light into the
personal lives of these individuals.
And in 2007, he released an episode
about the week he had spent with
the Westboro Baptist Church.
The name given to the episode was
“The Most Hated Family in America”.
It might sound like an extreme thing
to say, especially coming from a
mild-mannered Englishman working for
the BBC, but it was hard to dispute.
At that time, the members of the
church, the Phelps family, spent
their days protesting at the funerals
of American soldiers who had been
killed in Iraq and Afghanistan.
This was not an anti-war protest;
they weren’t protesting against the
government’s decision to send American
troops to war, they weren’t protesting
against the individual soldiers who
were fighting, or at least not directly.
They would stand by the side of the
road opposite where the funerals
were taking place, and hold up
signs saying things like “God hates
America”, “ America is doomed”, or
most famously, “God hates fags”.
A fag is a derogratory term in
American English for a gay person.
And as a linguistic side note, and
cross-cultural curiousity, if you
say “fag” in British English, it is
slang for something very different.
It means cigarette.
But the Westboro Baptist Church
was not on an anti-smoking crusade.
According to the Westboro Baptist Church,
American soldiers were being killed
in Iraq as a punishment for America’s
liberal attitude, and society’s growing
tolerance towards homosexuality.
So the reaction of the Westboro
Baptist Church, doing what it claimed
was “the Lord’s work”, was to stand
outside the funerals of dead soldiers
with these deeply offensive signs,
singing songs and rejoicing in the
deaths of their fellow Americans.
They “rejoiced” because in their minds
and according to their interpretation
of the Bible, this was an act of God,
and “everything God does is good”.
Now, we are not going to get into any
theological discussions here, and I
should add that this interpretation
of the Bible has been soundly
rejected by every other church as
incorrect, and as a deeply offensive
misinterpretation of the scriptures.
And as you might imagine, the presence of
the Westboro Baptist Church outside these
funerals, as families were trying to mourn
their loved ones, was never appreciated.
People would roll down their car
windows and hurl abuse at them,
passers-by would stop to confront
them, and those wanting to do things
by the letter of the law might file
claims against them or attempt to stop
them from coming close to a funeral.
As a result, the members of this church,
which really consists of one extended
family and a few stragglers, a few hangers
on, were almost universally loathed.
It’s not hard to understand why Louis
Theroux thought they deserved the title
of “the most hated family in America”.
Or as the Southern Poverty Law Center
put it "arguably the most obnoxious
and rabid hate group in America".
So, where did all of this hate come from?
Well, at the centre of it all was this
extended family, the Phelps family.
The head of the family, a man called
Fred Phelps, founded the Westboro
Baptist Church in 1955, in Topeka,
Kansas, in the American midwest.
He was a civil rights lawyer by
training, which might seem like an odd
starting point for someone who would go
on to form his own hate organisation.
It is especially odd as he was a pretty
successful and well-respected lawyer
who received awards for his work against
racial discrimination, that was, before he
was disbarred, forbidden from practising
law due to his offensive beliefs.
And this belief really came down to one
thing: a visceral hatred of gay people.
The entire religious doctrine
that he preached was all about the
supposed “sin” of homosexuality.
He would preach fiery sermons about
how everyone was going to hell,
not just gay people but anyone who
didn’t recognise and protest the
“homosexualisation” of America.
Every death, every natural disaster,
every bad thing that happened in the
world was, in his view, God’s way
of punishing the United States for
its tolerance towards homosexuality.
And, as is not uncommon in Southern
Baptist churches, he frequently preached
about Judgement Day, when Christ
would come again and everyone who had
ever lived would be judged by God.
Those who had lived a good life would be
saved, and those who hadn’t, well, they
would be subjected to eternal damnation.
And in Phelps's book, by his teachings,
only a very select group would not
be condemned to eternal damnation.
Only he and his
congregation, his followers.
Now, when he first formed the church,
it wasn’t quite so radical in its
beliefs, but his fiery temper put
regular churchgoers off, and his
church was frequented essentially
only by his family members.
Fortunately, at least in terms of
filling up all the seats in the
church, he had a large family: 13
children and around 50 grandchildren.
These children grew up in this completely
isolated environment of extreme hate.
All they knew was the teachings of
this powerful man, their father or
grandfather, who drilled into them that
everyone was going to hell and the only
way to avoid this fate was by doing
“the Lord’s work”, which in his mind
was protesting things like funerals,
going anywhere where they could to
attract the curious eyes of the media.
This started for good in the
early 1990s and has continued,
well, until the present day.
More than 30 years of standing
at funerals with offensive signs,
rejoicing in the deaths of strangers.
At first, their protests focused on
events related to gay rights, claiming
that natural disasters, terrorist
attacks, and even diseases like AIDS
were divine punishments for America’s
growing tolerance of homosexuality.
They gained particular notoriety in 1998
for picketing the funeral of a young
gay man called Matthew Shepard, who
was brutally murdered in a hate crime.
So while the family of this man, and
the country at large, was coming to
terms with the fact that this young
man had been viciously killed for being
gay, there was the Westboro Baptist
Church standing outside his funeral
cheering and celebrating his death.
It is pretty horrible stuff indeed, but by
the mid-2000s, their focus had expanded.
They began protesting the funerals
of American soldiers, claiming that
their deaths in war were also God’s
punishment for the country’s sins.
This was what shocked so many people.
Even in a country deeply divided
on politics and religion, the
idea of protesting at a soldier’s
funeral was almost universally
considered beyond the pale.
And yet, for the Phelps family, it
wasn’t just a protest—it was a mission.
They weren’t trying to win support.
They weren’t looking to
persuade people to join them.
In fact, they seemed to delight
in how much people hated them.
Because in their worldview, the
fact that they were hated was proof
that they were doing God’s work.
Fred Phelps often quoted a passage from
the Bible, John 15:18, where Jesus tells
his disciples: If the world hates you, you
know it has hated me before it hated you.
Now, clearly, Fred Phelps was not the
first nor will he be the last person to
have taken a section of a religious text
and interpreted it in a way that has
legitimised a deeply offensive action.
But it was this passage that he
kept returning to that allowed
him to explain to his family that
what they were doing was right.
To them, the fact that they were
so reviled and attacked wasn’t
evidence that they were wrong—it
was proof that they were righteous.
This mentality was what made
them so difficult to deal with.
They weren’t interested in discussion,
they didn’t care about being hated,
and if anything, they actively sought
out ways to provoke as much outrage
as possible, which was why they
protested at high-profile events
that they knew the media would be at.
So when Louis Theroux arrived
in 2007, he wasn’t just visiting
a strange little church.
He was stepping into a self-contained
world, one where hatred was seen
as a virtue, where children were
raised to celebrate the suffering
of others, and where outsiders
were seen as agents of Satan.
It made for pretty powerful viewing.
It’s still available on a few streaming
services, and it’s called “The Most
Hated Family in America”, if you’re
interested in watching it for yourself.
There are some particularly difficult
moments in the documentary where Louis
talks to the children, some just 3 or 4
years old, and others who were teenagers.
With the younger kids, it was,
of course, sad to see these tiny
little things holding up these
vile messages or repeating the same
offensive lines as their parents,
but you felt more sorrow than anger.
After all, you can’t really be angry
at a child that age; they don’t really
understand what they’re saying, they know
nothing else, and if they have grown up
in that environment and that is what they
have been told by everyone they have ever
met, of course that’s what they will say.
But more interesting and challenging
were his interactions with the
teenage girls of the family.
These teenagers, particularly a
pair of sisters called Megan and
Grace Phelps-Roper, were articulate,
intelligent, and—at least on the
surface—utterly convinced of the
beliefs they had been raised with.
Unlike the younger children, who simply
repeated what they'd been taught, the
teenagers were old enough to debate.
They quoted Bible verses, they had
rehearsed arguments, and they firmly
believed that what they were doing
was an act of love—warning sinners
before the Day of Judgment came.
What was especially striking
was how normal they seemed.
In another life, they might have been
the kind of bright, confident young
women who excelled at school, played
sports, or had wide social circles.
Instead, they spent their time standing
on street corners holding signs that
provoked rage, disgust, and sometimes
even violence from passers-by.
They talked about boys that they had
struck up conversations with, that
in another life might have become
friends, perhaps even boyfriends, but
instead quickly retreated to admitting
that these boys would burn in hell,
and that was actually a good thing
because this was the will of God.
And yet, despite their apparent
confidence in front of the cameras,
it seemed that somewhere beneath the
surface, there were seeds of doubt.
At one point in the documentary, Louis
Theroux asks one of the teenagers,
Megan, if she ever wonders what life
outside the church might be like.
She hesitates for a moment, then smiles
back at him and insists that she is
completely committed to her faith.
But it seems that that hesitation
was real, or at least was the sign of
a little seed that was germinating.
Perhaps that seed might have been planted
right there and then by Louis Theroux.
For just a few years later, these two
articulate sisters, Megan and Grace
Phelps-Roper, the ones who had so
vigorously defended the doctrine of
the Westboro Baptist Church, left.
Now, like any cult, leaving the
Westboro Baptist Church was not just
a matter of walking out the door and
saying, “Thanks, that was fun, but
I’ve decided it’s not for me anymore”.
For those born into it, as these two
were, the church was their entire world.
It wasn’t just their place of worship—it
was their home, their school, their
social life, and their family.
These girls’ grandfather was the
grand patriarch, Fred Phelps, the
man who had started it all, and their
mother had taken over his duties as
the day-to-day head of the church.
These girls weren’t just leaving
a church; they were cutting
themselves off from everything
and everyone they had ever known.
In the case of Megan Phelps-Roper,
her “transformation” had taken place
over the course of several years.
She later did a TED talk about it,
but long story short, she was in
charge of the church’s social media
accounts, from which she would
normally viciously attack its critics.
After a while, however, people started to
engage with her on a more friendly level.
Strangers on the internet started
to point out inconsistencies in her
argument, all while treating her
with a respect that she had thought
non-believers were incapable of.
Fast forward a few years, and she
came to the conclusion that perhaps
the rest of the world wasn’t evil
and wasn’t going to burn in hell, and
in 2012, she left the church behind.
Since then, she has gone on to become
a vocal critic of it, as well as
offered her unique perspective of
what life was actually like as part
of the most hated family in America.
And what has happened to the
church since then, you might ask?
Well, the founder, patriarch and cult
leader, Fred Phelps, died in 2014.
When his death was announced, cars
drove around the neighbourhood
honking their horns in celebration.
This man who had been a scourge,
a black mark, on the city of
Topeka was finally no more.
The tables had turned, and now it was
his death that was being celebrated.
But, according to some reports,
he may even have had a change of
heart towards the end of his life.
In 2013—just a year before he
died—Phelps was seen expressing support
for a more compassionate approach.
Perhaps being gay wasn’t the horrendous
sin that he had spent his life claiming
it was; perhaps, dare I say it, he
might have had a tinge of regret for
all the hate and anguish he had caused.
Even if this was the case, he had clearly
done enough indoctrination of his kids and
grandkids that they were firmly committed
to the church’s extreme doctrine.
Some former members have come
forward to say that in the last
few years of his life, Fred Phelps
was actually excommunicated by
his own family for showing too
much sympathy towards outsiders.
Now, this is not necessarily to
say that he is deserving of great
amounts of sympathy, having spent
60 years spewing hatred, but perhaps
it is indicative that even the most
ardent of beliefs can be changed.
And Megan and Grace Phelps-Roper
weren’t the only ones who left.
Over the years, dozens of other members
have also escaped and given outsiders
a peek into the day-to-day goings-on of
this extremely offensive organisation.
However, despite losing a bunch
of its members, the Westboro
Baptist Church still exists today.
It remains a small, isolated group,
still holding up offensive signs,
still protesting funerals, still
making headlines from time to time.
But its influence has faded.
Where once it shocked and outraged,
now it is often dismissed as a sad
relic of a hateful past—a fringe group
clinging to extremism, and just updating
its signs to claim that whatever is
the latest natural disaster or global
threat, from hurricanes to the COVID-19
pandemic, that this is the will of God.
The patriarch and man who started
it all might be long gone, but even
without him, his descendants, could
still make a strong claim for the title
of “the most hated family in America”.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on the Westboro Baptist Church.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Have you heard of the
Westboro Baptist Church?
Have you seen the Louis Theroux
documentary on it, or any
of the other documentaries?
Are there any organisations
like this in your country?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.